Cyprus is preparing to become a hub for
a humanitarian Aid operation for Gaza
the government of Cyprus has told DW
that preparations have now taken a big
step forward Cypress says it's now
working on technical not political
issues currently the only way to get Aid
into Gaza is from Egypt via the Raffa
Crossing but that is often
closed Cypress plans to use its Port of
larica to gather International Aid and
send it on to Gaza at it as it is one of
the place is closest in the EU to the
strip DW's Jack Paris sent us this
report this is the heart of a plan by
the cypriot government to send
International Aid to Gaza lanica Port
here is just under 400 km away the
cypriot government says Israel will not
oppose the plan as long as its officials
can check what's loaded onto ships Bound
for Gaza now we've proceeded from the
political to the technical uh part of it
so we've seen that they support
politically the implementation the
realization of the corridor and now
where the part technical issues are
being resolved getting the aid ships out
to sea should be simple enough the
biggest issue would be how to unload
them in Gaza the port there has not been
fully functional since Israel's blockade
from 2007 and Israel has bombed the area
since the October 7th terror attack the
cypriots plan could build a temporary
floating port just off the coast they
say this could dramatically speed up the
delivery of Aid one ship can carry 500
times what a truck can in nicasia the
cypriot Red Cross says it's in
communication with the government and
can move Aid like this quickly we are
ready at any time uh and we have such uh
warehouses smaller in all the districts
so uh we're ready at any time within the
hour this command center next to lanica
airport coordinates between 21 countries
when it comes to evacuations from crisis
zones it's been operational since 2016
it's set to play a major role in the
humanitarian Aid Corridor plans certain
precondition is to have a different
security environment uh to be able to
proceed with the implementation of this
idea but of course we are in contact
parallel to those preparations with all
stakeholders involved France Greece and
the Netherlands are all Keen to get Aid
moving here quick
let's talk now to the reporter who
prepared that DW's Brussels
correspondent Jack perck uh Jack Cypress
says it's close to agreeing this Aid
Corridor with uh Israel to Gaza what
what else can you tell
us yeah it was really interesting being
in Cyprus and speaking to the cypriate
government who appear to feel that they
are very confident that this
humanitarian Maritime Aid Corridor uh
plan will get agreement with the
Israelis the foreign minister of of
Cyprus constantinus combos was in Israel
at the end of the week speaking with the
president Isaac Herzog and they said the
Israeli side said that there are serious
negotiations on this essentially the
cypriots believe that because it's going
to be predominantly European Aid that
comes into the port of lanica that they
are proposing to is allow the Israeli
authorities to check exactly what is in
that Aid uh check what's going on to
ships and check what will eventually go
to Gaza that that seems to be uh a
feasible and a reasonable option for the
the Israelis as we heard uh the
presidency are saying that they now
believe that they have political
agreement but it's about technical
agreement and one of the big issues
there is about Gaza not having a port
right now and what would this help
actually look like in in practice on a
daily
basis yeah well it would be things like
medical supplies things like food water
fuel tents for people that are displaced
so little of that has been able to go
through the Raffa Crossing since uh the
October the 7th attacks and Israel
Israel's response in Gaza to that um
it's it's been you know we're hearing
widespread reports of a deteriorating
humanitarian situation and as the as the
cypriot say you can get 500 times the
sort of tonnage on a ship than you can
on an individual truck that has to pass
through the Raffa Crossing which is
frequently closing there's also an idea
swirling around and the the the the
cypriots weren't too Keen to be drawn on
this that potentially some ships could
be Hospital ships we know individual
countries have been sending them into
the Eastern Mediterranean but there some
as part of this humanitarian Corridor
there could be some additional Hospital
ships that would be able to take
casualties and injured people from Gaza
and look after them out to seea uh
whether that will actually come to
fruition we'll have to wait and see it's
they're not being drawn too clearly on
exactly whether that would be within the
plan and just really quickly Gaza
doesn't have a large Port as you said
how do you fix
that yeah so the idea is a floating
structure a floating dock that's been
done a number of times it would be
possible the Israelis may not be willing
for that to happen there's also a
segment in the plan to build a firm Port
but obviously as the war is continuing
probably European partners are not going
to want to build any firm structure for
now but they're going to need to off
that load that Aid that's the big
sticking point at the moment Nick okay
Jack peric from Brussels thanks so much
for that
insight